Add SSL CA migration guide and warnings about new Basic Constraints (#5001)
uyuni-project/uyuni-docs: en/modules/administration/pages/ssl-certs-ca-migration.adoc

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration]]
= Migrate SSL Certificate Authorities Manually
:revdate: 2026-06-15
:page-revdate: {revdate}

> Use this procedure to replace the root certificate authority (CA) of a {productname} Server by hand, for example to replace an older self-signed CA that does not mark the [literal]``X509v3 Basic Constraints`` extension as [literal]``critical``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this procedure to manually replace the root certificate authority (CA) of a {productname} server, for example to replace an older self-signed CA that does not mark the [literal]``X509v3 Basic Constraints`` extension as [literal]``critical``.
```

For more information, see xref:administration:ssl-certs-imported.adoc#ssl-certs-verify-ca-basic-constraints[].

.The migration is done in two phases:

> . You add the new CA to the trusted bundle so that both the old and new CA are trusted, and distribute it to all clients and proxies.

Reviewer: You may want to note that some machines not managed by the server may need to get the new CA too: if they use the API or browser to access the server.

. After every client and proxy trusts the new CA, you switch the server to a certificate signed by the new CA and drop the old one.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not switch the server certificate before all clients and proxies trust the new CA.
A client that does not trust the new CA can no longer connect, and you have to deploy the CA to it manually.
====

The certificates are stored in podman secrets, which the container reads at startup.

> The server CA bundle, certificate, and key are in [literal]``uyuni-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-key``; the database equivalents are [literal]``uyuni-db-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-db-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-db-key``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server CA bundle, certificate, and key are in [literal]``uyuni-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-key``; the database equivalents are [literal]``uyuni-db-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-db-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-db-key``.

Similarly, on Kubernetes, the root CAs are read from the `uyuni-ca` and `db-ca` config maps. while the certificates are read from the `uyuni-cert` and `db-cert` secrets.
```

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration-add]]
== Add the New CA to the Trust Bundle

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an installation on Kubernetes, append the new root CA certificate to the `uyuni-ca` and `db-ca` configmaps.

[source,shell]
----
kubectl get configmap -n uyuni-server uyuni-ca -o jsonpath='{.data.ca\.crt}' > combined.crt && \
echo "" >> combined.crt && \
cat ca.crt >> combined.crt && \
kubectl create configmap uyuni-ca --from-file=ca.crt=combined.crt --dry-run=client -o json | \
kubectl patch -n uyuni-server configmap uyuni-ca --patch-file /dev/stdin  -o yaml && \
rm combined.crt
----

A similar command also needs to be performed for [literal]``db-ca``.

For installations on podman, go through the following procedure.
```

> .Procedure: Adding the new CA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure: Adding the new CA on a podman installation
```

[role=procedure]
. Generate the new CA in a staging directory so the active CA in [path]``/root/ssl-build`` is left untouched.
  To use a third-party root CA instead, copy it into the container as [path]``/root/ssl-build-rotation/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT`` and skip this step.

>   For example, on the container host run [command]``mgrctl cp /path/to/third-party-ca.pem server:/root/ssl-build-rotation/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  When using a third-party root CA instead, copy it to `/root/ca-bundle.pem` on the container host machine and skip this step.
```

There is no need to copy the root CA in the container to copy it out after.

+

[source,shell]
----
mgrctl exec -ti -- rhn-ssl-tool --gen-ca --dir="/root/ssl-build-rotation" \
  --set-country="COUNTRY" --set-state="STATE" --set-city="CITY" \
  --set-org="ORGANIZATION" --set-org-unit="ORGANIZATION UNIT" \
  --set-common-name="SUSE Manager CA Certificate" --set-email="name@example.com"
----

. Append the new CA to the active CA bundle:

> 
> +
> 
> [source,shell]
> ----
> mgrctl exec -- cat /etc/pki/trust/anchors/LOCAL-RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT > /root/ca-bundle.pem
> mgrctl exec -- cat /root/ssl-build-rotation/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT >> /root/ca-bundle.pem
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
mgrctl exec -- cat /etc/pki/trust/anchors/LOCAL-RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT >> /root/ca-bundle.pem
----

If not using a third-party root CA, also run the following command:
[source,shell]
----
mgrctl exec -- cat /root/ssl-build-rotation/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT >> /root/ca-bundle.pem
----
```

. Update the CA secrets and restart the server:

+

[source,shell]
----
podman secret create --replace uyuni-ca /root/ca-bundle.pem
podman secret create --replace uyuni-db-ca /root/ca-bundle.pem
systemctl restart uyuni-server uyuni-db
----

Deploy the new CA to all Salt clients by applying the highstate, as described in xref:administration:ssl-certs-imported.adoc#ssl-certs-import-deploy-root-ca[].

> Update each {productname} Proxy, and deploy the CA manually to any client that is not a reachable Salt minion, such as traditional clients and clients behind a {kube} proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update each {productname} Proxy, and deploy the CA manually to any client that is not a reachable Salt minion, such as proxies running on {kube} or machines that are not managed.
```

Traditional clients are dead! And systems behind a proxy on Kubernetes are working like others. Do we have a documentation on how to update the proxies? Is the high state changing the proxy config too or does it need more?

Before continuing, confirm that the clients trust the new CA by comparing fingerprints.

> The following command prints the fingerprint of the new CA, which must match the certificate in [path]``/etc/pki/trust/anchors/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT`` on the clients:

Reviewer: You have two certificates in the `/etc/pki/trust/anchors/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT` file of the client. `openssl` will only work on the first one. You probably need to provide the command to output all the fingerprints of the file too:

`while openssl x509 -noout -fingerprint; do :; done </etc/pki/trust/anchors/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT`

[source,shell]
----
mgrctl exec -- openssl x509 -in /root/ssl-build-rotation/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT \
  -noout -fingerprint -sha256
----

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration-switch]]
== Switch to the New CA

[IMPORTANT]
====
Only continue after every client and proxy trusts the new CA.
====

> .Procedure: Switching to the new CA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure: Switching to the new CA on a podman installation
```

[role=procedure]

> . Promote the staged CA and generate a new server certificate signed by it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If not using a third party root CA, skip the steps generating the certificates and jump to the last one updating the podman secrets.
Promote the staged root CA and generate a new server certificate signed by it.
```

>   Use the fully qualified domain name of your {productname} Server for [systemitem]``set-hostname``, and repeat [systemitem]``set-cname`` for additional aliases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  In the following commands, use the fully qualified domain name of your {productname} server for [systemitem]``--set-hostname``, and repeat [systemitem]``--set-cname`` for additional aliases.
```

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration]]
= Migrate SSL Certificate Authorities Manually
:revdate: 2026-06-15
:page-revdate: {revdate}

> Use this procedure to replace the root certificate authority (CA) of a {productname} Server by hand, for example to replace an older self-signed CA that does not mark the [literal]``X509v3 Basic Constraints`` extension as [literal]``critical``.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that is a requirement for the openSUSE Leap 16.0 the server container is using (even if it's mentioned later in the page linked at line 8?

If you do it, then make sure you include that part inside an `if` for uyuni, as it's still not relevant for SUSE Multi-Linux Manager.

Reviewer: Can't be bad to remind it here too. However, we should rather document the Uyuni version rather than the base version of the container: that one is too hidden.

For more information, see xref:administration:ssl-certs-imported.adoc#ssl-certs-verify-ca-basic-constraints[].

> The migration is done in two phases.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can have this as an ordered list? https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/lists/ordered/

> First, you add the new CA to the trusted bundle so that both the old and new CA are trusted, and distribute it to all clients and proxies.

Reviewer 2: `trusted bundle` or `trust bundle`? This is elevant for later, see `*`

Then, after every client and proxy trusts the new CA, you switch the server to a certificate signed by the new CA and drop the old one.

[IMPORTANT]
====
Do not switch the server certificate before all clients and proxies trust the new CA.
A client that does not trust the new CA can no longer connect, and you have to deploy the CA to it manually.
====

> The certificates are stored in podman secrets, which the container reads at startup.

Reviewer 2: What about Kubernetes?

The server CA bundle, certificate, and key are in [literal]``uyuni-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-key``; the database equivalents are [literal]``uyuni-db-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-db-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-db-key``.

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration-add]]

> == Add the New CA to the Trust

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Add the New CA to the Trust Bundle
```

As per `*` above, if I am not wrong both things should match?

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration]]
= Migrate SSL Certificate Authorities
:revdate: 2026-06-23
:page-revdate: {revdate}

Use this procedure to replace the root certificate authority (CA) of a {productname} server, for example to replace an older self-signed CA that does not mark the [literal]``X509v3 Basic Constraints`` extension as [literal]``critical``.
For more information, see xref:administration:ssl-certs-imported.adoc#ssl-certs-verify-ca-basic-constraints[].

ifeval::[{uyuni-content} == true]
[NOTE]
====

> The {productname} {productnumber} server container validates certificates strictly (Python 3.13 and later) and rejects any CA certificate that does not mark the [literal]``X509v3 Basic Constraints`` extension as [literal]``critical``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python 3.13 and later (and probably other SSL clients) validates certificates strictly and rejects any CA certificate that does not mark the [literal]``X509v3 Basic Constraints`` extension as [literal]``critical``.
```

IIUC it's not the server that changes this, but the client side code. So the first issue is the proxy running on the new images. The server itself doesn't complain, apart from the cobbler thing.

====
endif::[]

> On Podman installations, the [command]``mgradm ssl`` commands perform the rotation for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Podman installations, the [command]``mgradm ssl`` commands help performing the rotation.
```

There is still have the manual part to roll out the root CA every where: let's not be overconfident 😉

> They generate or import the new CA, update the server and database secrets, restart the services, and check that the clients trust the new CA before switching.

Reviewer: I wonder if we should trust the number of clients checks: it probably doesn't count all proxies and systems that are not managed by the server:

```suggestion
They generate or import the new CA, update the server and database secrets and restart the services.
```

.The migration is done in two phases:
. With [command]``mgradm ssl add-ca`` you add the new CA to the trusted bundle so that both the old and new CA are trusted, and distribute it to all clients and proxies.
. After every client and proxy trusts the new CA, [command]``mgradm ssl rotate`` switches the server to a certificate signed by the new CA and drops the old one.

> Also consider any machine that is not managed by the server but still accesses it through the API or a browser, as it needs the new CA too.

Reviewer: May be you can warn here that those are not counted by your check.

The server CA bundle, certificate, and key are in [literal]``uyuni-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-key``; the database equivalents are [literal]``uyuni-db-ca``, [literal]``uyuni-db-cert``, and [literal]``uyuni-db-key``.
On {kube}, the root CAs are read from the [literal]``uyuni-ca`` and [literal]``db-ca`` config maps, while the certificates are read from the [literal]``uyuni-cert`` and [literal]``db-cert`` secrets.
The [command]``mgradm ssl`` commands manage these secrets on Podman; on {kube} you update the config maps and secrets manually as described below.

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration-add]]
== Add the New CA to the Trust Bundle

On Podman, add the new CA with [command]``mgradm ssl add-ca``.
The command generates a new self-signed root CA, or imports a third-party one, appends it to the [literal]``uyuni-ca`` and [literal]``uyuni-db-ca`` secrets without changing the served certificate, restarts the services, and prints the SHA-256 fingerprint of the new CA.

To generate a new self-signed CA, run the following command on the container host.
Replace the subject values with the ones for your organization.

> The server fully qualified domain name is detected automatically, or you can pass it as an argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The server fully qualified domain name is detected automatically, or can be passed as an argument:
```

[source,shell]
----
mgradm ssl add-ca --ssl-password CA_PASSWORD \
  --ssl-country COUNTRY --ssl-state STATE --ssl-city CITY \
  --ssl-org ORGANIZATION --ssl-ou "ORGANIZATION UNIT"
----

> If you omit [option]``--ssl-password``, the command prompts for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If [option]``--ssl-password`` is omitted, the command prompts for it.
```

Repeat [option]``--ssl-ca-intermediate`` for each intermediate CA:

[source,shell]
----
mgradm ssl add-ca --ssl-ca-root /root/new-ca.pem \
  --ssl-ca-intermediate /root/intermediate-ca.pem
----

On {kube}, append the new root CA certificate to the [literal]``uyuni-ca`` and [literal]``db-ca`` config maps manually:

[source,shell]
----
kubectl get configmap -n uyuni-server uyuni-ca -o jsonpath='{.data.ca\.crt}' > combined.crt && \
echo "" >> combined.crt && \
cat ca.crt >> combined.crt && \
kubectl create configmap uyuni-ca --from-file=ca.crt=combined.crt --dry-run=client -o json | \
kubectl patch -n uyuni-server configmap uyuni-ca --patch-file /dev/stdin  -o yaml && \
rm combined.crt
----

A similar command also needs to be performed for [literal]``db-ca``.

Once the server trusts the new CA, distribute it to every client and proxy.
Deploy the new CA to all Salt clients by applying the highstate, as described in xref:administration:ssl-certs-imported.adoc#ssl-certs-import-deploy-root-ca[].

On each {productname} Proxy, make it trust the new CA without a full redeployment.
The proxy reads its trusted CA from the [literal]``uyuni-ca`` Podman secret, so update that secret directly.

> For a self-signed CA, export the new root CA from the server first:

Reviewer: Don't you have the bundle with the two root CAs in http://<server>/pub/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT ? This way you wouldn't even need to append anything, just replace.

----

For a third-party CA, use the root CA certificate you passed to [command]``mgradm ssl add-ca``.
Copy the new root CA certificate to the proxy host, append it to the current CA, replace the secret, and restart the proxy:

[source,shell]
----
podman secret inspect --showsecret --format '{{.SecretData}}' uyuni-ca > /tmp/proxy-ca.pem
cat new-ca.pem >> /tmp/proxy-ca.pem
podman secret create --replace uyuni-ca /tmp/proxy-ca.pem
systemctl restart uyuni-proxy-pod
----

Also make sure the new CA is deployed to any other machine that is not a reachable Salt minion but still accesses the server, such as proxies running on {kube} or unmanaged systems.

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration-verify-trust]]
== Confirm the Clients Trust the New CA

Before switching, confirm that the clients trust the new CA.
On Podman, run [command]``mgradm ssl rotate --check-only`` to query the Salt minions and report which ones already trust the new CA and which do not, without performing the rotation:

[source,shell]
----
mgradm ssl rotate --check-only
----

This check is best effort: it only covers Salt minions that respond at the time of the check.

> Traditional clients, offline minions, and non-minion systems such as proxies running on {kube} or unmanaged machines are not covered and must be verified manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Offline minions, and non-minion systems such as proxies running on {kube} or unmanaged machines are not covered and must be verified manually.
```

Traditional clients are no longer a thing: we don't support them any more.

Do you cover the proxy config files on registered hosts too?

To verify one of those manually, compare fingerprints.
The [command]``mgradm ssl add-ca`` command already reported the SHA-256 fingerprint of the new CA.
You can also recompute it from the new CA certificate.
For a self-signed CA, read the staged certificate from the server:

[source,shell]
----
mgrctl exec -- openssl x509 -in /root/ssl-build-rotation/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT \
  -noout -fingerprint -sha256
----

For a third-party CA, run the same command against the root CA file you passed to [command]``mgradm ssl add-ca``.

> The client trust file [path]``/etc/pki/trust/anchors/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT`` can contain several certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client trust file [path]``/etc/pki/trust/anchors/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT`` contains several certificates.
```

At this stage of the reading it has to contain two

List the fingerprints of all of them on a client and confirm that the new CA fingerprint is present:

[source,shell]
----
while openssl x509 -noout -fingerprint -sha256; do :; done < /etc/pki/trust/anchors/RHN-ORG-TRUSTED-SSL-CERT
----

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration-switch]]
== Switch to the New CA

[IMPORTANT]
====
Only continue after every client and proxy trusts the new CA.
====

On Podman, switch to the new CA with [command]``mgradm ssl rotate``.
The command promotes the CA staged by [command]``mgradm ssl add-ca``, issues a new server certificate signed by it, replaces the server and database certificate, key, and CA secrets, and restarts the services.

> Before switching, it checks over Salt that the clients trust the new CA and refuses to continue if some do not, unless you pass [option]``--force``.

Reviewer: Does it mean that offline minion not reporting would fail unless `--force` is passed?

----
mgradm ssl rotate --emergency --ssl-password CA_PASSWORD
----

[WARNING]
====
An emergency rotation drops the old CA immediately, so any client or proxy that does not yet trust the new CA can no longer connect until you deploy the new CA to it manually.
After an emergency rotation, distribute the new CA to all clients and proxies as described in xref:ssl-certs-ca-migration.adoc#ssl-certs-ca-migration-add[], and update the proxies as described below.
====

[[ssl-certs-ca-migration-update-proxies]]
== Update Proxies

In xref:ssl-certs-ca-migration.adoc#ssl-certs-ca-migration-add[] you already made each proxy trust the new CA by updating its [literal]``uyuni-ca`` Podman secret.
Now that the server uses a certificate signed by the new CA, every proxy also needs its own certificate signed by it.
For each proxy, regenerate the proxy configuration and redeploy the proxy:

ifeval::[{mlm-content} == true]
xref:installation-and-upgrade:container-deployment/mlm/proxy-deployment-mlm.adoc[Proxy Deployment].
endif::[]
ifeval::[{uyuni-content} == true]
xref:installation-and-upgrade:container-deployment/uyuni/proxy-deployment-uyuni.adoc#proxy-setup-containers-generate-config[].
endif::[]

> If you build images with Kiwi, repackage the RPM file with the new CA using [command]``mgrctl exec -- mgr-package-rpm-certificate-osimage``, then apply the highstate on the image build hosts.

Reviewer: We should probably do this automatically after generating the new root CA so the package contains the bundle: this avoid users to rebuild the images hurriedly. Imagine cash registers not starting because the image built a few weeks (or months) earlier didn't have the new root CA…
